JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill is away.
A heartbreaking tragedy in Orego
on a deadly shooting on a commun
campus.
Also tonight, Russia says its ai
Syria target terrorist groups li
State, while U.S. officials ques
actually in the crosshairs.
COL. STEVE WARREN, U.S. Army: Th
were very clear publicly that th
to strike ISIL. We don't believe
struck ISIL targets. So, that's
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: a rare bipa
a new bill that proposes reforms
and how the U.S. metes out justi
from Republican Senator Mike Lee
Senator Cory Booker.
All that and more on tonight's "
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The scenes are al
A mass shooting today leaves a t
and disbelief. It happened today
when a 20-year old man started s
a classroom at a college. The st
general reported 13 dead, includ
State police said 20 others were
William Brangham begins our cove
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Classes were w
way at Umpqua Community College
erupted at mid-morning. The atta
the calm of the campus in Rosebu
180 miles south of Portland. Wit
the school went into lockdown as
in to confront the gunman.
JOHN HANLIN, Douglas County, Ore
Officers from around county imme
to the college, and upon arrivin
located the shooter in one of th
Officers engaged that suspect. T
exchange of gunfire. The shooter
neutralized. And officers contin
the campus looking for other thr
shooter is deceased.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Officials evac
staff and students off campus to
fairgrounds, while small groups
waited and ambulances rushed the
hospitals. The college remained
police checked buildings and gea
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One student said
the gunman came into her class,
to stand and state their religio
opened fired.
I spoke to Aaron Scott of Oregon
moments ago by phone.
Aaron Scott, thank you for talki
Now, you have just been at some
where family members were gather
did you hear?
AARON SCOTT, Oregon Public Broad
spoke with a number of students
at the school, as well as teache
gone through the lockdown, that
school responded immediately sen
e-mail alert letting everyone to
the classrooms and either hide i
at the bookstore or in the kind
back closet.
But I also spoke with a number o
who were in the classroom right
to the shooting who retold the s
an initial loud sound next door,
teacher knocked on the door to a
was OK, and then there was a num
and screams, at which point this
"Run, run," and everybody kind o
from that building and went to f
wherever they could find it.
I mean, I spoke with one student
just behind a large green kind o
transformer, and then a couple o
ran to the bookstore and were ab
in that stockroom.
I'm sorry. Go ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did any of them g
at the shooter?
AARON SCOTT: No. Nobody I spoke
shooter, nor did I speak with an
was in the actual classroom of t
JUDY WOODRUFF: How were they cop
AARON SCOTT: They -- nerves were
strained.
I mean, people, I think, were in
a state of shock, and most of th
by family and friends and gettin
support from people who loved th
mean, I spoke of the student who
bookstore, said that they kind o
were there for a number of minut
were waiting for the police to c
was this kind of horrifying nerv
thinking, this happens elsewhere
happen at our school.
But it wasn't until the police a
that they broke down really cryi
of what happened, but then they
each other in a group hug, reali
we have survived this and we hav
it.
So, it's mixed. I mean, there's
people who are dealing with real
then some people who are feeling
were blessed that they got throu
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Such a terrible,
AARON SCOTT: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aaron Scott with
Broadcasting, we thank you.
AARON SCOTT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: School and colleg
across the country are grappling
to prevent attacks like this one
I'm joined now by Daniel Carter.
of the VTV Family Outreach Found
a group formed by families of th
of the mass shooting at Virginia
in 2007. He leads that group's 3
Campus Safety Initiative.
Daniel Carter, thank you for bei
Your connection is that you advi
of the victims of Virginia Tech,
2007, 32 students -- people died
what, 17 others wounded. This mu
awfully familiar to you.
S. DANIEL CARTER, Director, VTV
Foundation: It's an all-too-comm
and our thoughts and prayers are
of those affected.
And, you know, we were created t
and respond to these types of cr
So, our goal with the 32 Nationa
Initiative is to empower college
to be better equipped to prevent
to these types of situations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are colleges
doing across the country now tha
doing before Virginia Tech?
S. DANIEL CARTER: The two bigges
involve multidisciplinary threat
teams, where if someone is of co
can be reported and assessed by
professionals, law enforcement p
for example.
And, also, you have emergency ma
where you have emergency notific
and you have a rapid response by
And that's one of the keys is, t
to be connectivity between campu
and small, and if they don't hav
law enforcement, connectivity wi
enforcement, so that their secur
are routinely drilled and traine
law enforcement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are there a unifo
questions that college officials
and even students are to think a
assess the people around them to
who is a risk and who isn't?
S. DANIEL CARTER: Well, I think
gut.
That goes all too uncommon -- it
often dismissed. But trust your
whether or not the college has a
report that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if someone is
I mean, is it as simple as that?
S. DANIEL CARTER: If you see som
something. It may sound MDNMho
it is as simple as that.
And you can report it to the aut
they should take a look at it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How many schools
the kind of directions that you
S. DANIEL CARTER: Most large --
residential colleges and univers
adopted the threat assessment an
management models.
We are just now beginning to exp
colleges, so I don't know how ma
are, but I know that they have a
protocol which was followed and
emergency identification protoco
followed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What more, Daniel
you think needs to be done to pr
kinds of awful things from happe
S. DANIEL CARTER: I think we nee
better job of making sure threat
teams are established on every c
country, that they're well-publi
that colleges and universities h
response procedures in place, an
partner with local first-respond
And our 32 National Campus Safet
online at 32NCSI.org has guidanc
colleges and universities can ac
as well as what students and the
need to look for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So it is an ongoi
S. DANIEL CARTER: It is. We have
way in the last eight years, but
long way to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Daniel Carter, we
very much.
S. DANIEL CARTER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in other news
government of Afghanistan claime
security forces have regained co
city of Kunduz from the Taliban.
They said they recaptured the ce
embattled northern city after a
overnight. After daybreak, Afgha
forces could be seen patrolling
They hunted for retreating Talib
as fighting continued in places.
But President Ashraf Ghani claim
ASHRAF GHANI, President of Afgha
translator): We praise the secur
of our country for their
tireless efforts leading the war
p.m. last night until the early
during the rest of the day, they
successfully launch operations.
is that we didn't have anyone ma
JUDY WOODRUFF: The NATO coalitio
that U.S. special forces fought
Afghan groups in the battle, ret
in self-defense.
The United Nations Refugee Agenc
it expects 1.4 million migrants
to arrive in Europe this year an
sharply from an estimate just a
That report today came as new wa
mainly Syrians, kept pouring int
Croatia, aiming to move on to We
They face the prospect of worsen
with the onset of fall.
Closer to home, Hurricane Joaqui
Central Bahamas today, and forec
it's now extremely dangerous. Su
reached 130 miles an hour, and c
stronger. The storm's future cou
closely watched, as late project
that it is more likely to track
the U.S. mainland next week.
In the meantime, people up and d
Coast were urged to get ready. D
warned people against waiting to
where John Kerry is headed.
CRAIG FUGATE, Administrator, Fed
Management Agency: We can't alwa
these storms are going to go. An
waiting until the last minute, i
late. We have got time. This sto
in the Bahamas. It's not going t
of there quickly. So if you're f
through the New England states,
get ready for hurricane season,
time. This is October 1. Get rea
JUDY WOODRUFF: The states of Mar
Jersey and Virginia declared eme
in advance of the storm.
The U.S. House of Representative
the stage for a possible veto sh
President Obama over defense spe
today passed a bill authorizing
It gives the president much of w
by padding a war-fighting accoun
House says that that would break
spending caps. The Senate gets t
week.
In New York City, the police dep
unveiled new rules on the use of
a highly critical report. The ci
general found the NYPD has no cl
for officers on using force. And
too often, the department doesn'
those who go too far.
Under the new guidelines, offici
police will have to document eve
use force, even in brief encount
WILLIAM BRATTON, New York City P
I speak to the issue of the sanc
life. We are one of the few in g
that have the power, the authori
a life, to take people into cust
them of their liberty. So, that
life, that respect for life has
JUDY WOODRUFF: New York police h
scrutiny in the choke hold death
in 2014. More recently, a police
up former tennis star James Blak
him for a criminal suspect.
In economic news, auto sales in
double-digit gains in September.
the way with a 23 percent jump.
sales were stagnant, amid a scan
on pollution tests.
And on Wall Street, stocks were
awaited tomorrow's jobs report.
industrial average lost 12 point
near 16270. The Nasdaq rose near
and the S&P 500 added three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
surrounding Russia's foray into
push in the U.S. to rein in some
revisiting a furor from a decade
controversial cartoons, and much
Russia continued airstrikes thro
Syria today, targeting what it s
State and other terrorist target
Meantime, the United States cont
campaign in Syria's skies, and b
to lessen the chances of further
in what is becoming a crowded ai
Chief foreign affairs correspond
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: This was just e
today, moments after an apparent
on the village of Deir al-Asafir
of the sites across Western Syri
hit on day two of the Russian bo
There were more strikes to the n
Turkey, in Idlib province, where
Syrian branch, the al-Nusra Fron
And in Homs, a building housing
Syrians was struck.
MAN (through translator): We wer
here on the steps, and suddenly
noise and the rocket fell here.
children were on the floor. It w
MARGARET WARNER: That desperate
its exact opposite in the relati
a marketplace in old Damascus, u
control of the Bashar al-Assad r
VARYJ GERUN JIAN, Syria (through
This is a very positive step, an
the best solution for the crisis
living in.
MARGARET WARNER: As Russian mili
showed strikes across the countr
speaking from Syria maintained t
the Islamic State.
COL. IGOR KLIMOV, Russian Army (
The Russian aviation group carri
first precision strikes on eight
the international terrorist orga
State. All targets have been des
MARGARET WARNER: But one rebel g
by the CIA said its fighters had
And at a special Pentagon briefi
Steve Warren, speaking from Bagh
the Russians' claims.
COL. STEVE WARREN, U.S. Army: We
tell you is, the Russians were v
publicly that they were going to
I'm not going to get into exactl
hit, but we don't believe that t
ISIL targets. So, that's a probl
I mean, the Russians have said t
going to do one thing, and here
something different than that.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign M
it looks like a terrorist, if it
a terrorist, if it walks like a
if it fights like a terrorist, i
right?
MARGARET WARNER: In turn, Russia
minister, Sergei Lavrov, at the
appeared to acknowledge the atta
limited to the Islamic State.
SERGEI LAVROV: We always were sa
we are going to fight ISIL and o
groups. This is the same -- the
which the Americans are taking.
our position as well. We see eye
the coalition on this one.
MARGARET WARNER: In fact, Russia
military officials spoke by tele
today for the first time since t
airstrikes began, in a bid to de
airspace over Syria.
With both Russian and American f
active there, a Pentagon spokesm
need to avoid miscalculation. An
focus on the air war, Reuters re
has now sent ground troops into
Assad.
Meanwhile, Moscow said it would
in Iraq as well.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-A
the "NewsHour" Wednesday that he
Russian involvement, if needed,
the Islamic State.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret join
Margaret, you have been reportin
all day long. What have you lear
what happened during this teleco
U.S. and Russian officials?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, I think t
thing, Judy, this went about an
two teams were, as I said, by te
led by someone from the Defense
and someone from the Joint Chief
counterparts on the other side,
was highly technical.
And they described it as cordial
but highly technical. And I mean
tiny -- focused on pilot safety.
if one aircraft spots another, a
American, how do they communicat
first? What language do they use
do they use? I mean, it was real
stuff like that.
The U.S. did make its case about
be focusing on ISIS targets, not
moderates or whatever, but there
on that level. It was really, re
And when -- each side presented
to the other and they agreed the
consult their bosses and hopeful
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we keep heari
deconfliction. What does that re
MARGARET WARNER: I was told by o
general today that that's not ev
a military term.
On its simplest level, it means,
how do you prevent an accidental
So, it would be issues such as w
discussing today. But at a deepe
means, how do we -- let's say we
that you bomb your bad guys, we
guys, we're not under one comman
is something cooperative there a
a channel of communication?
The problem in Syria is -- and t
been cases like that -- the prob
is that if on the list of the Ru
guys, that is, are moderate oppo
that we have trained and support
even armed, then what do we do?
talks today didn't get to that l
that's going to be really the nu
JUDY WOODRUFF: So the U.S. has s
pretty consistently over the las
that they -- that the Russians a
these moderate anti-Assad rebel
do they know that's happening?
MARGARET WARNER: That's a very i
question, Judy, because, at firs
all very clear, but apparently i
clear that they were.
It's clear they weren't hitting
by the Islamic State. This is de
area that's been dominated by th
Free Syrian Army and the moderat
But we had an interesting text m
today by an activist outside the
who said that actually today it
civilians that were killed.
And he gave terrible, terrible s
hitting a bread line with all th
killed. Some of it, we put in ou
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARGARET WARNER: ... that in fac
when the Pentagon is being caref
look, we can't do damage assessm
ground. We don't have eyes and e
ground. And that's why they're b
in saying that the targets were
opposition.
But it clearly wasn't ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very -- in just a
a few seconds, what do you look
MARGARET WARNER: I'm told that,
are going to be another round of
was late today -- and that, in t
I think it's going to get more d
there, if the Russians keep up t
bombing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Grim.
Margaret Warner, we thank you.
Now we turn to this country's ma
problem, and our ongoing series
on efforts to reform it.
In a rare moment of bipartisan u
Hill today, Republicans and Demo
unveiled joint legislation to cu
number of people locked up in fe
half of whom are drug offenders.
Senate Judiciary Committee Chair
Grassley announced the deal, fla
senators in both parties.
SEN. CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa:
today because of a lot of hard w
strong desire by those of us her
the Senate work. This is truly a
piece of legislation. It's the b
justice reform in a generation.
of a very thoughtful bipartisan
by the Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The deal was year
If passed, it would end the so-c
strikes rule for life sentences
offenders, expand mandatory mini
for some terrorism-related crime
more education and jobs programs
and limit solitary confinement f
We're joined now by two of the m
of the bill, Democratic Senator
of New Jersey and Republican Sen
Lee of Utah.
And we welcome you both.
Senator Lee, to you first.
What are the most important ways
say this legislation changes our
justice system?
SEN. MIKE LEE (R), Utah: You kno
forward to passing this legislat
it fixes some problems with our
sentencing system.
We have got some of our sentence
of the sentences prescribed by f
are plainly excessive in relatio
of the crime. This is resulting
away a lot of people, a lot of s
and uncles and nephews and broth
for years, sometimes decades at
offenses that, in many cases, do
that kind of lengthy incarcerati
This doesn't eliminate minimum m
but it does reform them in a ver
and long overdue way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Booker, w
you add to that? What are the mo
changes here? And I know that yo
a long time been involved on dea
what we call the front end of th
justice system.
SEN. CORY BOOKER (D), New Jersey
Well, look, first of all, the gr
about this legislation is, it's
by people on all parts of the po
how our broken our system is, wh
had, since 1980, an 800 percent
our federal prison population.
So this really begins to unwind
pretty significant way, returnin
discretion to judges, making sur
unwind some of those aspects of
minimums that you talked about.
But even as exciting is what hap
that are already behind the bar,
to, through good behavior, throu
in programs and education, to re
time down and be released.
In addition to that, just very e
People don't realize how expensi
hold elderly people who have bee
40-, 50-year sentences and now a
or very ill, the expense of the
This is saying, wait, these folk
little risk. It's something call
release.
And then, for me, just as this m
that we are, to have the aspects
juveniles, from the solitary con
to the understanding that if you
dumb in your teenage years, by t
Mike and my's age decades later,
be still limiting your economic
as we know it does, because peop
confess that for job interviews.
your ability to get loans and al
So, in its totality, this compre
is going to be steps in the righ
after years of going the wrong w
justice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Lee, is t
of this that you think is going
make a big difference?
SEN. MIKE LEE: I think one of th
a lot of people are celebrating
that we make retroactive a law p
was several years ago by Congres
the disparity -- the crack to po
disparity from 100-1 down to 18-
that retroactive.
That coupled with the expansion
safety valve provision and the c
a new safety valve provision wil
judges more discretion in more c
the criminal penalty attached to
crime seems excessive, the judge
some discretion, in the case of
drug felonies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Lee, just
you, I know that members of both
parties have come together on th
is at the very time when a numbe
candidates for president are tal
getting the tougher on crime.
I'm thinking particularly of Don
How do you explain that?
SEN. MIKE LEE: Well, this bill i
crime. It's tough on crime by ge
on crime. And this is one of the
I'm so pleased that we're able t
together, as Republicans and Dem
This is a very bipartisan piece
We recognize this is one of thes
Judy, that's neither Republican
it's liberal nor conservative. T
an American issue. We can get be
crime when we devote our resourc
that makes them more effective a
SEN. CORY BOOKER: And let me jus
I watched the debates. I saw Ran
Chris Christie and others talk a
talk about sentencing reform, ba
This is nothing new. And Republi
if you look at the governors, Re
have been leading in some ways,
governor of Georgia, for example
lot of things already that we're
in this legislation.
So, this is not a Republican or
issue. I'm sorry. My allies on t
everybody from the Koch brothers
Norquist. This has really been a
coming together of right or left
that are absurd.
If you just heard what Mike Lee
this idea that you could have do
vs. powder cocaine sentencing --
were changed, so people that wer
those laws could be in and out,
they violated them recently, the
out, but somebody who violated t
ago was still sitting in prison.
So, the absurdities in the syste
costing taxpayers a quarter-of-a
dollars a year paying for a brok
when we know, both of us know we
those investments in law enforce
in building roads and bridges.
This is a time -- a bill that ca
from all sectors of our society,
a liberal or conservative. This
for celebrating smart government
to be making sure we keep us saf
up there, I think, that spoke to
about this is a bill that is goi
us safer as a country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Lee, we k
even though -- if this bill pass
is going to affect 10 percent of
in prison, the 10 percent who ar
prison. You still have another t
individuals who are in state pri
What about them?
SEN. MIKE LEE: OK, so, Judy, thi
of an effort that's being replic
states across the country.
There are a lot of states, inclu
state of Utah, that are experime
criminal justice reforms. This i
that same trend. And so we expec
be replicated in many states, ac
the different needs of each stat
own system.
And while it's true that this re
a portion of the federal inmates
inmates that are affected by thi
going to make a big difference.
all the difference in the world
their families and to their comm
for those who will be able to re
communities and start contributi
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, Sen
even though you have clearly got
bipartisan support, isn't this s
to be tough going into an electi
get this passed?
SEN. CORY BOOKER: Well, I think
real great allies. We have the D
whip and the Republican whip. We
chairman of the Judiciary Commit
really have a Congress now contr
houses by Republicans that want
they can get things done.
And with this kind of leadership
Party on this team, I think this
that has a better chance than ma
efforts that are going on in Con
now. And, again, it's not novel.
lot of these innovations going o
ranging from Texas to Mississipp
to California, so I think that g
greater degree of hope.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Cory Book
Mike Lee, gentlemen, we thank yo
SEN. CORY BOOKER: Thank you very
SEN. MIKE LEE: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we have a
on that deadly shooting at a com
in Oregon.
President Obama addressed the tr
moments ago at the White House.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
As I said just a few months ago,
a few months before that, and I
time we see one of these mass sh
thoughts and prayers are not eno
not enough.
It doesn't capture the heartache
and anger that we should feel. A
nothing to prevent this carnage
inflicted someplace else in Amer
or a couple of months from now.
We don't yet know why this indiv
what he did. And it's fair to sa
who does this has a sickness in
regardless of what they think th
may be.
But we are not the only country
has people with mental illnesses
to do harm to other people. We a
advanced country on earth that s
kinds of mass shootings every fe
Earlier this year, I answered a
an interview by saying, the Unit
of America is the one advanced n
in which we do not have sufficie
gun safety laws, even in the fac
mass killings. And later that da
a mass shooting at a movie theat
Louisiana, that day.
Somehow, this has become routine
is routine. My response here at
ends up being routine, the conve
the aftermath of it. We have bec
this. We talked about this after
and Blacksburg, after Tucson, af
after Aurora, after Charleston.
It cannot be this easy for someb
to inflict harm on other people
or her hands on a gun. And what'
of course, is the response of th
any kind of commonsense gun legi
Right now, I can imagine the pre
being cranked out. We need more
will argue, fewer gun safety law
Does anybody really believe that
JUDY WOODRUFF: A clearly angry P
just moments ago at the White Ho
He also pointed out, he said, sc
gun owners favor measures of gun
And he also said that the U.S. s
of dollars preventing terrorist
U.S. soil, but he said Congress,
refuses even to permit collectin
mass shootings in this country.
We will be back in a moment.
Ten years ago this week, a Danis
set off a firestorm when it publ
cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed
violent protests, which claimed
of hundreds of people.
One decade later, those involved
of the crisis now need lifelong
Special correspondent Malcolm Br
been out to see some of them, an
he explores the changing landsca
in Europe as it adjusts to an ev
population.
And an editor's note: We will no
cartoons. It is our policy not t
of the Prophet Mohammed, because
is offensive to some viewers.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Kurt Westergaar
the most despised people on the
house in Central Denmark is now
after a man from Somalia broke i
ago and tried to kill him.
KURT WESTERGAARD, Cartoonist: I
to apologize for. So, I will nev
apology. I think it would be a l
self-respect if I should give an
MALCOLM BRABANT: Westergaard is
that his concept of free express
under threat.
KURT WESTERGAARD: Well, I think
a basic feeling of anger. I work
cartoonist according to Danish t
I had done nothing wrong. I thin
a satirist's job to criticize th
MALCOLM BRABANT: Demonstrations
broke out across the Muslim worl
as word of the cartoons spread.
at the forefront of protests in
than 200 people were killed worl
In Afghanistan and elsewhere ove
of the past decade, there have b
about the consequences of insult
important figure in the Muslim r
Denmark, some members of the Mus
have occasionally taken to the s
demonstration was by the radical
Islamist group.
MAN: And we will never compromis
issue. And, yes, they can then c
because we have this stand. Beca
accept their so-called freedom o
they call us uncivilized.
MALCOLM BRABANT: A Copenhagen's
mosque, Imran Shah, spokesman fo
Society, reiterates the red line
not be crossed.
IMRAN SHAH, Islamic Society: The
of connecting bombs with the rel
with the very acknowledgment of
you propose that there is no God
the last messenger of God sent t
was the Prophet Mohammed, connec
a bomb, that's a very immature a
way of starting a debate and dis
MALCOLM BRABANT: Do you consider
have won because there are some
say that newspapers and all othe
media are now self-censoring, be
are too afraid to publish images
Mohammed cartoons?
IMRAN SHAH: There's no winners o
this. The simple thing is to res
other and not to force people to
be dishonored, ridiculed and so
forth.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But one of Denm
prominent free speech advocates,
worries that the West is now abi
blasphemy rules.
JACOB MCHANGAMA, Free Speech Adv
we have a situation where we hav
veto which is being respected, h
by journalists and editors, whic
is sad. But at least some have c
to admitting that they are actin
and not out of respect or tolera
MALCOLM BRABANT: Another key fig
cartoon story living life in the
Flemming Rose, the culture edito
the 12 drawings. He will spend t
his life under guard. There were
eyes present when we met in Cope
park.
FLEMMING ROSE, Editor: I think f
is in bad standing. I don't thin
key threat comes from Islamists.
the key challenge to free speech
our own culture, that too many p
believe in the value of free spe
In order to save the social peac
and multicultural and multiethni
Muslims need to work out, you kn
concept of blasphemy and apostas
many Muslims, it's OK to commit
nonbelievers or Muslims commit b
MALCOLM BRABANT: I took a train
to Sweden to meet artist Lars Vi
the target of a terrorist attack
in February. He's been living in
houses after drawing the prophet
Protection officers drove me to
in an armored car. A guard remai
police interview room, as Vilks
refusal to compromise.
LARS VILKS, Artist: The best med
the whole thing is actually to c
more -- more prophet pictures. I
the end, you should actually see
just pictures. And there is pict
and then the end the whole thing
fade away.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The new works o
produces are a symbol of his def
unwavering sense of humor.
LARS VILKS: Now I have been spec
making personal copies of well-k
and adding the dog, but very sma
can't really see it.
Yes, this is a dog-free picture.
-- it's also possible to get suc
And anyone actually who wants to
I can also provide them with abs
pictures, not even a small one.
MALCOLM BRABANT: A stark contras
confrontational stance could be
welcome refugees rally, which op
Danish government's anti-migrant
people turned out to offer a war
to those flocking to Europe, man
are Muslim.
This great movement of refugees
is perhaps one of the biggest hi
in Europe in the 21st century. A
like it's going to continue for
to come. And one of the big ques
people are asking is whether or
have to accept Western values an
culture in return for sanctuary,
have to adapt its traditions in
the newcomers? At the heart of t
is free expression.
Karolina Dam abhors extreme Isla
son, who had learning difficulti
after becoming a Muslim. He join
State and was killed earlier thi
the Syrian Turkey border. But li
an equality activist in one of C
most diverse neighborhoods, she
confrontation.
KAROLINA DAM, Mother of Slain IS
I think respect for another huma
be before anything else. We don'
fight about paintings of Jesus,
or anything else, Buddha or anyt
But that's because it's not -- i
problem.
But, for Muslims, it's a problem
on pushing it? Why keep on pokin
the eye?
UZMA AHMED, Equality Activist: W
to have a -- talk about a huge c
here, because it's about rights
equality. But it's not given rig
freedom of speech is for the ver
I see that we have given up our
speech and solidarity in society
who want to use freedom of speec
and scorn minorities.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Flemming Rose h
been giving great thought to wha
he believes are necessary to dea
growing diversity.
FLEMMING ROSE: To me, somebody w
with freedom, the question is, h
going to be able to preserve fun
like freedom of expression and f
religion, which also implies the
say no to religion, in a society
more and more -- growing more an
So, these clashes are inevitable
most European politicians believ
order to keep the social peace,
restrict freedom. I think it's t
around.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the run-up t
the overriding image of Islam in
been one of generosity, as young
efforts to help migrants seeking
in Scandinavia.
At Copenhagen Central Station, t
providing nourishment and fresh
new arrivals.
IMRAN SHAH: Everybody who comes
they have a duty to abide by the
by the rules. To have the discus
freedom of speech, we're not her
freedom of speech, but we're her
how to use it.
Now, if you want to start a deba
or critical discussion about rel
let's do that on a platform of r
honor, instead of ridiculing or
an already marginalized minority
societies.
KURT WESTERGAARD: I hope that th
they would respect the Danish de
they do that, they would be well
and integrated.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Now 80 years ol
will end his days under guard. H
regard him, as a principled figh
Western values, or a man out of
the new realities of a changing
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Malc
in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The very term urb
sounds like a paradox, or a misn
very least. But it is a real bus
movement, albeit a small one, th
find in industrial greenhouses i
of cities around the country.
Our economics correspondent, Pau
headed to Brooklyn, where the pr
growing, to find out more about
it and whether it can be scaled
It's part of our weekly series M
which airs every Thursday on the
PAUL SOLMAN: On a rooftop in Bro
fresh answer to an age-old probl
feed the world.
VIRAJ PURI, Gotham Greens: This
that we're standing in is 20,000
so about half of an acre.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, there's basil o
Is that basil?
VIRAJ PURI: That's correct. That
This is a medley of, a blend of
varieties.
PAUL SOLMAN: Lettuces, spices, t
being grown on a rooftop in Broo
Puri's urban ag startup Gotham G
says his hydroponic plot produce
the yield per square foot of old
farmland.
But growing lettuce in New York
VIRAJ PURI: Real estate is extre
in New York City. There's not a
land. There's not a lot of open
But what we found is that roofto
underutilized resource. We found
opportunity to monetize rooftops
owners who weren't using them fo
PAUL SOLMAN: Meanwhile, the dema
fruit that hasn't had to be ship
Mexico or even further afield is
to sell to consumers who want to
the locavores.
VIRAJ PURI: Locavorism, as it's
certainly a growing trend. And I
not just because people want foo
closer to them. That's a big par
it's what that represents. It re
dollars closer to home. It repre
small-batch, craft manufacturing
large, anonymous agribusiness.
PAUL SOLMAN: And this urban farm
that doesn't travel food miles,
food footsteps, going farm to sh
Whole Foods market downstairs.
The produce is more expensive to
that indoor hydroponics depends
light and must import all its wa
The pests come of their own voli
VIRAJ PURI: Despite us being on
in an urban area, those aphids a
make it in here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Aphids and thrips?
VIRAJ PURI: That's correct, aphi
So, we will actually release pre
in the greenhouse that will prey
insects. And we do that on a wee
We create a little insect warfar
the greenhouse.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, literally behin
I'm talking to you, and behind y
matter, there's little predator
little aphids?
VIRAJ PURI: Yes, indeed. They're
most valuable team members.
PAUL SOLMAN: Meanwhile, across t
River, in de-industrialized Newa
empty buildings are being simila
So, this is a farm and there is
more acreage soon?
DAVID ROSENBERG, Co-Founder, Aer
these systems are 20-feet high.
building them that are 36-feet h
is 80-feet long. So, now imagine
80-feet-long and 35 of these sta
PAUL SOLMAN: In an abandoned pai
laser tag facility, AeroFarms is
tray upon tray of leafy greens,
of 10 acres' worth down on the f
building 70,000 more square feet
and beyond, no sun, no soil, jus
beard neck if you get too close
I'm wearing this because we don'
mustache hair in the kale.
DAVID ROSENBERG: Yes. It's just
to make sure there's reduced ris
contamination. I shaved. If I di
for 24 hours, I would wear a bea
well.
PAUL SOLMAN: But if some of the
trivial, the overall purpose of
a world food crisis is obviously
And AeroFarms co-founder David R
DAVID ROSENBERG: The food crisis
here. Some people tribute the Ar
and the catalyst of that to a sh
in the price of wheat.
PAUL SOLMAN: How much of a contr
the solution is farming like you
DAVID ROSENBERG: It definitely h
Whether it's 5 percent, 10 perce
it's hard to say. It depends how
adopted.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rosenberg intends t
as fast as possible. And he has
from investors the world over, i
immense sovereign wealth fund an
most prominent investment trusts
AeroFarms the day we were there.
And so those folks are thinking
or are going to invest in what y
here and abroad?
DAVID ROSENBERG: Correct.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, are there going
like this in China? Are there al
DAVID ROSENBERG: Eventually, the
to build these farms all over Ch
PAUL SOLMAN: And what's the key
At AeroFarms' R&D facility, a fo
marketing director Marc Oshima e
MARC OSHIMA, AeroFarms: AeroFarm
growing with aeroponics or misti
with nutrients. It's much more e
hydroponics. It's much more effe
of delivering the nutrients and
PAUL SOLMAN: So, the little root
hanging in the air, as opposed t
MARC OSHIMA: What makes us uniqu
medium. We actually have a paten
growing medium, which is cloth.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the cloth is ma
MARC OSHIMA: Our proprietary gro
is made out of 100 percent recyc
Each one of our growing cloths i
of 26 bottles that we're taking
waste stream.
PAUL SOLMAN: And this is known a
farming, or verticulture.
MARC OSHIMA: When we think about
farming, we think about how many
beds of growing can we get in an
space. It's about that productiv
foot. We're growing a wide range
leafy greens, red komatsuna. We
arugula. We have Pak Choi. We ha
mustard greens.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, you just...
MARC OSHIMA: Enjoy it. That's on
things, ready to eat here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes, kind of mustar
arugula? This isn't your own pro
is it?
MARC OSHIMA: It's our proprietar
algorithm, our recipe on dialing
flavor.
PAUL SOLMAN: And speaking of gro
AeroFarms, Gotham Greens is as w
It's now running two other urban
New York, including a brand-new
in Queens three times the size o
above Whole Foods, and they will
a rooftop in Chicago.
But there is a limit to how big
Right? I mean, you can't become
or General Mills or something, r
VIRAJ PURI: Perhaps one day. The
limit when it comes to agricultu
PAUL SOLMAN: But hold on says, a
economist Jerry Nelson, there is
food crisis in the making, he th
as things stand, the world won't
hydroponics alone.
GERALD NELSON, Agricultural Econ
are going to have some expenses
have when you're growing vegetab
countryside.
You want to go to grow lights, t
got big expenses for electricity
got to have clean water. And if
about doing this in Delhi or Nai
question is, where are you going
right amount of clean water?
PAUL SOLMAN: So, no, indoor farm
be the answer to the world's foo
it's doing good and growing busi
America.
This is economics correspondent
now trying to eat all the local
I can find when not reporting fo
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: This Saturday, pu
around the country will be parti
American Graduate Day 2015, a na
media initiative to help communi
the school dropout crisis.
Among the highlights, the storie
Graduate Champions, people who g
mile to make sure children succe
Robb Janov is one of them. He te
in Albuquerque. And our colleagu
Mexico's PBS station KNME are sh
story.
ROBB JANOV, Music Teacher: In 19
hired to teach music classes her
Middle School.
The kids that were in my classes
required to be there, or in a lo
they were just dumped in there b
was nowhere else to put them. So
this whole population of kids wh
and were not choosing to do musi
That was the impetus for the Roc
Band program. Most of the kids i
Rhythm Band have never played mu
of them don't have instruments.
have is adolescence exuberance,
all we need at the beginning of
And when they see that they can
together as a band and the first
in, when the band hits it, reall
groove, the kids are in disbelie
at each other and then they look
I'm jumping all over the place b
got it.
I look back at my adolescence, m
me. When I think about the kids
class, failing all their classes
life is a mess, and then they wa
door and they sit down at their
and they look like they're home,
start getting the parts and they
like a part of something, that's
why I teach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Don't miss it. Th
American Graduate Day broadcast
this Saturday, October 3. Check
listings to find out when it is
area.
And tune in later tonight on "Ch
former acting CIA Director Mike
Russia's latest moves in Syria.
And that's the "NewsHour" for to
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right h
evening with Mark Shields and Da
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHo
you, and good night.